---
tags: epidemiology, julia
title: Effects of cervical cancer mortality trends on life expectancy
author: Karl Pettersson
lang: en
---

Since the 1960s, mortality, and also incidence, from cervical cancer has
decreased greatly in Sweden, as well as other high-income countries, and
screening with Pap tests, which may detect even precancerous lesions, is said to be
"the most important factor" in this decline [@danielsson12]. During the same
period, life expectancy among Swedish females has increased about 9 years. One
might ask how much the decrease in cervical cancer mortality has contributed to
this increase.

One way to assess this question is to take a life table for a recent year, and add the
difference between age-specific cervical cancer mortality rates for the early
1960s and recent rates to the age-specific total morality rates used to
calculate risks of death, and then recalculate the life table with the new
death rates. This shows what the life table had looked like if cervical cancer
mortality had stayed the same for the last 50 years, while recent age-specific
mortality rates from all other causes had been as they actually are. To do
these calculations, you need:

1. Recent data for age-specific number of deaths (due to all causes) and
   population at risk. This can be obtained from @scblten for single years of
   age.
2. Data for age-specific number of deaths due to cervical cancer and population
   at risk from recent years as well as the 1960s. This can be obtained from
   @whomort in 5-year age groups.
3. Some software which can be used to calculate life tables from vectors of
   population at risk and deaths. In this post, my [LifeTable
   package](https://github.com/klpn/LifeTable.jl) for Julia will be used.

All files used in the analysis below are available in a
[gist](https://gist.github.com/klpn/e12475f0b312ad1897e3aa614fa429bc). The [CSV
file with cervical cancer
mortality](https://gist.github.com/klpn/e12475f0b312ad1897e3aa614fa429bc#file-cervc4290rate2-csv)
has been generated using my [mortchartgen
scripts](https://github.com/klpn/mortchartgen) scripts. With the files in the
gist available (and LifeTable installed), `include("cervclt.jl")` will
calculate a life table for Swedish females in 2013, and then a new life table
with difference between cervical mortality rates 1960 and 2013 added to the
2013 mortality rates. The Julia file contains the following code:

``` {.julia .numberLines}
using DataFrames, LifeTable
cerv = readtable("cervc4290rate2.csv")
fse13r = readtable("fse13.csv")
fse13 = DataFrame(age = collect(0:105),
	pop = [fse13r[2][1:105]; sum(fse13r[2][106:111])],
	dths = [fse13r[3][1:105]; sum(fse13r[3][106:111])])
fse13lt = PeriodLifeTable(fse13, 2)
cerv60 = transpose(convert(Array, cerv[10, 12:23]))
cerv13 = transpose(convert(Array, cerv[63, 12:23]))
cervdiff = cerv60 .- cerv13
cervdiff5 = map((x)->fill(x, 5), cervdiff)
cervdiffyr = [fill(0, 25); vcat(cervdiff5...); fill(0, 21)]
fse13mc60 = fse13lt[2] .+ cervdiffyr
fse13c60 = DataFrame(age = fse13[1], mort = fse13mc60)
fse13ltc60 = PeriodLifeTable(fse13c60, 2, true, "rate")
```

The files from @scblten contain ages up to 110 years; ages over 105 are summed
together due to a very small population  (line 5--6). Only cervical cancer
mortality rates from 25--29 to 80--84 years are included (line 8--9): the
contribution of other age groups to cervical cancer mortality is small, and
inclusion of these would create some technical complications due to differing
age formats. The array of differences in cervical cancer mortality is expanded
to have the same length as the array of total mortality (line 11--12).

After the script has run, `round(fse13lt[:e][1], 2)` gives the life expectancy
at birth in the life table calculated from the actual 2013 rates, rounded to
two decimals. This should return `83.71`, which is the same as in the life
expectancy column in the precalculated table available from @scblten. On the
other hand, `round(fse13ltc60[:e][1], 2)` gives the life expectancy at birth
given 2013 rates plus the difference in cervical cancer from 1960, and should
return `83.55`. So, if the decline in cervical cancer mortality since 1960,
presumably due to Pap smears and other factors, had not occurred, life
expectancy among Swedish females would have been about 1.9 months shorter.

The difference in mortality rates can be visualized (with PyPlot):

``` {.julia .numberLines}
using PyPlot
plot(fse13lt[:age][26:85],log(fse13lt[:m][26:85]),
label = "2013")
plot(fse13lt[:age][26:85],log(fse13ltc60[:m][26:85]),
label = "2013 with 1960 cervical rates")
xlim(25,84)
xlabel("age")
ylabel("log(rate)")
legend(loc=2)
title("Total mortality, Swedish females 25\u201384")
```

![Total mortality among Swedish females with and without cervical mortality
reduction.](../images/FSe13Cervdiff60.svg){width=100% height=100%}

The decline in cervical mortality makes significant differences to total
mortality mainly at younger ages, where mortality already is low, which
explains the modest effect on life expectancy.

It may be questioned whether trends in age-specific mortality rates from other causes
would have stayed the same if trends in cervical cancer mortality had been
different. The data is about so-called underlying causes, for which exactly
one is reported for each death. The interpretation of this can be problematic
if there are complex dependencies between different causes of death. This
should be less of a problem for cervical cancer than for causes mainly occurring at
older ages, where people often suffer from multiple diseases. However, there
might be correlations between cervical cancer and risk factors for certain
other causes of deaths, so that women who would have died from cervical cancer
without e.g.\ Pap smears, have increased (or perhaps decreased) mortality rates
from some other causes, compared to the general population.

## References
