---
tags: epidemiology
title: Circulatory clue
author: Karl Pettersson
lang: en
---

On 26 November, i posted a little quiz on Bluesky, with screenshots of
Visidata [@visidata] showing year intervals during which a certain
epidemiological property held for female and male populations
[@kpbsky241126]. The tables are also available on this site, as
tab-delimited files for [female](../prop_x_f.txt) and
[male](../prop_x_m.txt) populations.  I asked about the property they
show.

The answer is that they show the first and last, or latest, year, and total
number of years, with mortality statistics available via @whomort, for
which at least 50 percent of deaths among females or males, over all
ages, have circulatory disease as underlying cause of death. To avoid
fluctuations caused by small populations, in microstates and other
territories in the WHO statistics, only years with at least 200 total
deaths for each sex have been included.

Circulatory deaths are defined according to the expressions in the
[Mortintl.jl counfiguration](https://github.com/klpn/MortIntl.jl/blob/a696fb1e9ab72bc7f89d5bd13a9cb3286bbae546/data/mortintl.json#L163),
i.e.\ mostly the circulatory chapter in the different ICD versions,
plus cerebrovascular diseases, which were included in the neurological
chapter in ICD-6/7, as they will be again in ICD-11 [@icd11mms].

The tables show patterns similar to the ones I discussed earlier, e.g.
in my posts [27 March 2022](2022-03-27-transition.html) and [19 July
2022](2022-07-19-ihme.html). In general, having at least 50 percent
deaths ascribed to circulatory disease, has been more common among
females, despite females having lower risk for early circulatory death
than males in most populations.

The earliest statistics available via @whomort is from 1950, and at
that time, populations in the Anglosphere, such as US, Australia, New
Zealand, England and Wales and Scotland, had the property for at least
their female populations, and Nordic countries soon followed. However,
in most of these countries, the period ended in the 1980s. Sweden was
relatively late, with 1991 and 1994 as last years for males and
females.  The last European non ex-Communist countries having it for
at least their female populations were Austria and Germany (partially
former East Germany, however) in 2003, and Greece in 2008. Most of the
countries with end years later than 2000 are former Eastern Bloc
countries in Eastern Europe or Central Asia, and some Middle East and
North African countries, such as Syria and Egypt. It should be noted
that the availability of statistics via @whomort is very sparse for many
countries, especially in Africa.

These developments could be interpreted partially as a story of rising
and falling mortality from circulatory diseases, due to medical
advances and environmental factors. But, as I have touched on in my
earlier posts, they probably, above all, tell us a story about
changing views of what we accept as causes of death, as discussed by
@reid241114. Rich countries in the Anglosphere were quick to largely
dismiss causes like "old age" during the 20th Century, which led to
circulatory diseases, often referring to arteriosclerosis, dominating
age-related mortality instead [@Kohn82]. But later, these countries,
with their ageing populations, were also quick in perceiving also
these practices as too rough, which has led to increasing shares of
deaths attributed to other causes, such as dementia, and the, for the
Western countries, typical late 20th Century pattern, with a high
proportion of circulatory deaths, nowadays being most common in
middle-income countries. The mentioned changes in ICD-11, where stroke
and other cerebrovascular diseases are separated from heart disease
and merged together with dementia, may be seen in light of these
changed perceptions.

## References
